00:05:17	Yassine Ferhane:	GM
00:05:26	Gary Schulte:	lol
00:05:34	Manu:	GM!
00:05:50	Justin Traglia:	Gm
00:05:56	Ladislaus:	gm folks
00:06:14	Kevaundray Wedderburn:	Gm
00:06:39	James Zaki:	Gm
00:06:49	AndrÃ©s:	gmgm
00:07:02	cody:	Reacted to "Gm" with ğŸ‘‹
00:08:28	Marius van der Wijden:	Historical breakout room lets goo
00:08:34	Luca Donno | L2BEAT:	gmgm
00:08:35	Alex Hicks:	going to be shipped once the project is scheduled to be shipped? :D
00:08:41	Luca Donno | L2BEAT:	Reacted to "Historical breakout ..." with ğŸš€
00:08:42	Gary Schulte:	Reacted to "Historical breakout ..." with ğŸš€
00:09:04	Ladislaus:	planning doc

https://github.com/eth-act/planning/blob/main/projects.md
00:09:21	Ladislaus:	+ agenda for this call

https://github.com/ethereum/pm/issues/1900
00:10:04	Alex Hicks:	also ethproofs at ethcc!
00:10:12	Will Corcoran:	Reacted to "also ethproofs at et..." with ğŸ”¥
00:10:41	Will Corcoran:	Replying to "also ethproofs at et..."

register here: https://luma.com/beast_mode
00:13:08	Gary Schulte:	Reacted to "also ethproofs at et..." with ğŸ”¥
00:13:24	Ladislaus:	Hat auf "Historical breakout ..." mit ğŸš€ reagiert
00:15:53	Manu:	Reacted to "also ethproofs at et..." with ğŸ”¥
00:17:21	Will Corcoran:	Nice overview, @Kevaundray Wedderburn !
00:17:29	Kamil Salakhiev:	what is the expected size of zkvm proofs?
00:17:36	Jordi - ZisK:	Replying to "also ethproofs at et..."

Is there any incentive mechanism for provers?
00:17:49	Luca Donno | L2BEAT:	Reacted to "Nice overview, @Keva..." with â•
00:18:01	James Zaki:	Reacted to "Nice overview, @Ke..." with â•
00:18:30	Justin Traglia:	What do you expect the avg proof verification time to be?
00:19:21	Emiliano | Boundless:	sorry baby just came from the daycare :D
00:19:23	david kim:	Can you share more on the part where you mentioned the attester verifying the zk proof is similar to replaying it?
00:19:29	Gary Schulte:	Reacted to "sorry baby just came..." with ğŸ˜†
00:19:36	Manu:	Reacted to "sorry baby just came..." with ğŸ˜†
00:19:40	Ladislaus:	Hat auf "sorry baby just came..." mit ğŸ˜† reagiert
00:19:43	Alexandre Belling:	Is there a spec for the guest program other than the exec-spec?
00:19:57	Justin Traglia:	Reacted to "sorry baby just came..." with ğŸ˜†
00:20:26	Alexandre Belling:	Replying to "Is there a spec for ..."

Namely, what the input are and their format and what the output must be exactly
00:20:30	Gary Schulte:	Reacted to "Nice overview, @Keva..." with â•
00:20:42	Emiliano | Boundless:	Reacted to "Nice overview, @Ke..." with â•
00:21:28	Will Corcoran:	Replying to "What do you expect t..."

miliseconds, I believe
00:22:17	Gary Schulte:	Reacted to "Namely, what the inp..." with â•
00:23:01	Gary Schulte:	Replying to "Is there a spec for ..."

I havenâ€™t been able to find output spec
00:24:38	Kevaundray Wedderburn:	Replying to "Can you share more o..."

I can give some link on discord, but roughly it is because zkVMs provide a proof of execution
00:25:01	Kevaundray Wedderburn:	Replying to "Is there a spec for ..."

We are working with the STEEL team to get this into their specs
00:25:15	Alexandre Belling:	Reacted to "We are working with ..." with â¤ï¸
00:25:26	Emiliano | Boundless:	Reacted to "We are working wit..." with â¤ï¸
00:25:57	Kevaundray Wedderburn:	Replying to "Is there a spec for ..."

Currently we have the most â€œupdatedâ€ API here if you are interested: https://github.com/eth-act/ere-guests/tree/main/crates/stateless-validator-reth/src
00:26:18	Kevaundray Wedderburn:	Replying to "Is there a spec for ..."

Happy to take this to discord to discuss further!
00:26:24	Kevaundray Wedderburn:	Reacted to "miliseconds, I belie..." with ğŸ‘
00:26:35	david kim:	Replying to "Can you share more o..."

That would be great. Look forward.
00:28:56	Yi Sun:	Is there a link to the spec for EIP-8025?  The EIP page seems mostly empty at the moment.
00:29:08	Emiliano | Boundless:	Reacted to "Is there a link to..." with ğŸ‘
00:29:18	Manu:	Replying to "Is there a link to t..."

https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/tree/master/specs/_features/eip8025
00:29:22	Alexandre Belling:	Reacted to "Happy to take this t..." with ğŸ‘
00:29:33	Justin Traglia:	Reacted to "https://github.com/e..." with ğŸ‘
00:29:55	Kevaundray Wedderburn:	Reacted to "https://github.com/e..." with ğŸ‘
00:31:03	ignacio:	Project, 1, 2 and 6 slides link (https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1WPMCW63Bq6ybbUa0BW85Qz6uZ0ZCHIDAN23j-nTWxuc/edit?usp=drive_link )
00:39:15	Alexandre Belling:	Regarding autoprecompiles enablement (or any static code analysis effort). Would it be realistic to require quest programs to provide basic-block annotations?
00:40:00	Leo Alt [powdr]:	In my experience it shouldn't be needed (in the specific case of current autoprecompiles)
00:41:29	Kevaundray Wedderburn:	Reacted to "In my experience it ..." with ğŸ‘
00:45:55	Guillaume:	Reacted to "In my experience it ..." with ğŸ‘
00:48:31	Gary Schulte:	Reacted to "We are working with ..." with â¤ï¸
00:48:41	Gary Schulte:	Reacted to "Happy to take this t..." with ğŸ‘
00:51:45	Justin Traglia:	I didnâ€™t quite understand why validators re-sign proofs, but I will follow up later ğŸ™‚
00:52:11	Francesco Risitano:	https://frisitano.github.io/slides/presentations/optional-proofs/index.html
00:52:21	Justin Traglia:	Reacted to "https://frisitano.gi..." with ğŸ™
00:53:15	Fara Woolf:	Reacted to "https://frisitano.gi..." with ğŸ™
00:54:53	Manu:	Sorry I never shared my screen on Zoom, I had to restart zoom to enable it.

My slides:
https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1oteBK4ZWb3M2VKhReZWahPs_sKVwRAxB0KT_I7cZOK0/edit?slide=id.g273f645140f_0_5#slide=id.g273f645140f_0_5
00:55:08	Ladislaus:	Hat auf "Sorry I never shared..." mit ğŸ™ reagiert
00:55:14	David Dada:	Reacted to "Sorry I never shar..." with ğŸ‘
00:56:26	Kevaundray Wedderburn:	Reacted to "https://frisitano.gi..." with ğŸ™
00:56:32	Kevaundray Wedderburn:	Reacted to "Sorry I never shared..." with ğŸ™
00:56:33	Kevaundray Wedderburn:	Reacted to "Sorry I never shared..." with ğŸ‘
00:56:45	Justin Traglia:	We should consider integrating zkboost-client into CL clients.
00:57:02	Justin Traglia:	Replying to "We should consider i..."

Can chat about this async.
00:57:24	Justin Traglia:	So we donâ€™t need another 3rd party piece of software.
00:58:09	Kevaundray Wedderburn:	Replying to "We should consider i..."

I think for verification it makes a lot of sense
00:58:10	Francesco Risitano:	@Justin Traglia the idea is that a validator A can equivocate. They can send an invalid proof to node B and send a valid proof to node C. Node B will now reject all proofs from Validator A so even if node C forwards the valid proof to node B they will reject it. Therefore there is a discrepancy / lack of consensus on what proofs are valid.
00:58:12	Kevaundray Wedderburn:	Reacted to "So we donâ€™t need ano..." with ğŸ‘
00:59:04	Han Jian:	Project 5 slide https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/11-h-h2e1dEAvKO-Ei5yStEi5VtOjKegv8w_bSN7ZNuY/edit?slide=id.p#slide=id.p
00:59:14	Han Jian:	Reacted to "So we donâ€™t need ano..." with ğŸ‘
00:59:18	Han Jian:	Reacted to "I think for verifica..." with ğŸ‘
00:59:26	Justin Traglia:	Reacted to "@Justin Traglia the ..." with ğŸ‘€
00:59:42	Ladislaus:	Hat auf "Project 5 slide http..." mit ğŸ™ reagiert
00:59:46	Manu:	Reacted to "I think for verifica..." with ğŸ‘
01:00:09	Emiliano | Boundless:	We are happy to provide support here: on the choice of GPUs/tuning clusters as well for scaling providing capacity with Boundless network.
01:01:13	Luca Donno | L2BEAT:	Reacted to "We are happy to prov..." with â¤ï¸
01:01:30	Kevaundray Wedderburn:	Reacted to "We are happy to prov..." with â¤ï¸
01:01:31	Kevaundray Wedderburn:	Reacted to "Project 5 slide http..." with ğŸ™
01:01:34	Kevaundray Wedderburn:	Reacted to "@Justin Traglia the ..." with ğŸ‘€
01:02:59	Stefan Starflinger:	https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/12SR4cTiDJHAZIkUZTvEim9ejlqRkrQ8R6FKXD-F-ivI/edit?usp=sharing
01:03:16	Yi Sun:	How do we envision the HW usage ramping over time as new GPUs are released?
01:03:24	Guillaume:	who has access to these clusters ?
01:04:19	Stefan Starflinger:	Replying to "How do we envision t..."

What do you refer to with usage, how well zkEVM utilizes the GPU compute resources?
01:04:22	Ladislaus:	https://zkevm.ethereum.foundation/blog/cryptography-research-update
01:04:57	Kevaundray Wedderburn:	Replying to "who has access to th..."

Currently it will be pandaOPs + EF zkEVM team
01:05:34	Yi Sun:	Replying to "How do we envision t..."

E.g. would we move to 6090 when released
01:05:38	Stefan Starflinger:	Replying to "How do we envision t..."

I assume new GPUs will always be around 10-10% more efficient and it would make sense over time to replace old hardware with new hardware.
01:05:47	Stefan Starflinger:	Replying to "How do we envision t..."

10-20*
01:06:02	George Kadianakis:	https://zkevm.ethereum.foundation/blog/cryptography-research-update
01:06:06	George Kadianakis:	Reacted to "https://zkevm.ethe..." with ğŸ”¥
01:06:16	Kevaundray Wedderburn:	Reacted to "https://zkevm.ethere..." with â¤ï¸
01:06:19	Ladislaus:	Hat auf "https://zkevm.ethere..." mit â¤ï¸ reagiert
01:06:47	Alex Hicks:	Sharing my slides in advance: https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1sbpbHLyT4F3E76w9JNRbY1rs5cPaCtzfL5EoXEFYbTA/edit?usp=sharing
01:10:36	Justin Traglia:	Replying to "@Justin Traglia the ..."

Hmm I see. This is a problem because provers cannot currently be slashed. Alternatively, we could allow/verify proofs from other peers if the proof is different, even if you received a bad proof before. Thereâ€™s some level of trust that peers have successfully verified before forwarding. Iâ€™m a little worried that having everyone re-sign a 300KiB message will be a waste of resources.
01:11:50	Francesco Risitano:	Replying to "@Justin Traglia the ..."

Is the message size significant? I would assume you just sign a root?
01:12:15	Manu:	Replying to "We should consider i..."

Ideally the BN should call a lib for the verification, like done with the KZG lib.
01:12:19	Justin Traglia:	Replying to "@Justin Traglia the ..."

Oh, is that it? Maybe thatâ€™s not so bad.
01:13:01	Justin Traglia:	Replying to "We should consider i..."

I agree.
01:13:09	Francesco Risitano:	Replying to "We should consider i..."

Yeah I think we can integrate proof verification into the proof engine
01:13:56	Kevaundray Wedderburn:	Replying to "We should consider i..."

Yeah I agree, right now its easier to have this docker for ease of development and versioning
01:15:32	Francesco Risitano:	Replying to "@Justin Traglia the ..."

Yes thats how weâ€™ve implemented it in lighthouse.
01:15:59	Justin Traglia:	Reacted to "Yes thats how weâ€™ve ..." with ğŸ‘
01:17:15	James Zaki:	Reacted to "What do you refer ..." with â•
01:19:10	Francesco Risitano:	Reacted to "Yeah I agree, right ..." with ğŸ‘
01:19:18	Kevaundray Wedderburn:	Reacted to "Yes thats how weâ€™ve ..." with ğŸ‘
01:23:48	Emiliano | Boundless:	have to drop. great presentations and keep going.

stefan lmk if you need any support on the hw side of things, feel free to reachout on telegram: emilianonbonassi or email: emiliano@boundless.network

happy hacking!
01:24:13	Kevaundray Wedderburn:	Reacted to "have to drop. great ..." with â¤ï¸
01:24:46	Gary Schulte:	if a guest program team is not ready to be on ethproofs yet, does it make sense to sign up ahead of time?
01:24:54	Fara Woolf:	https://staging--ethproofs.netlify.app/sign-up
01:25:17	ignacio:	Reacted to "have to drop. great ..." with â¤ï¸
01:25:19	Will Corcoran:	Replying to "if a guest program t..."

Which guest?
01:25:32	Ladislaus:	Hat auf "https://staging--eth..." mit ğŸ™ reagiert
01:25:33	Gary Schulte:	Replying to "if a guest program t..."

as-yet-unnamed zig based guest from besu team
01:25:42	Will Corcoran:	Replying to "if a guest program t..."

Noice :_
