# beam call #1: beam client team introductions

**Prev Call:** Initial Call

**Meeting Date/Time:** Friday 2025/2/14 at 15:00 UTC

**Meeting Duration:** 1.5 hours

[GitHub Agenda](https://github.com/ethereum/pm/issues/1327)

[Audio/Video of the meeting](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sSx6juIu4AI)

Moderator: Justin Drake

Facilitators: Ladislaus von Daniels & Will Corcoran
- Facilitator emails: ladislaus@ethereum.org // will@ethereum.org
- Facilitator telegrams: @ladislaus0x // @corcoranwill



## Summary

| Section | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| 01.1 | **Meeting Introduction** First beam call focusing on the social layer with 64 participants. Justin Drake announced a second Beam Call scheduled for February 28th at 2pm UTC to discuss technical progress since DevCon. |
| 01.2 | **Development Teams** Eight new consensus layer teams have emerged. Teams are geographically diverse, spanning all continents except Antarctica, with many being self-funded. |
| 01.3 | **Protocol Guild Updates** New rule changes require Protocol Guild members to work full-time on Layer 1 research and development. A formal funding proposal will need to be submitted and voted upon by the Protocol Guild DAO. |
| 01.4 | **Legal Challenges** Team is facing trademark issues with the name 'beam', which has resulted in a cease and desist notice. Decision made to change the project name, with Ladislaus tasked to gather community suggestions for a new name. |
| 01.5 | **Researcher Introductions** EF Researchers that are working to coordinate beam chain-related research efforts. On the Cryptography side of things: Dmitry and Benedikt. On the Staking side of things: Anders (along with Ansgar and Caspar) and Francesco. On the Block Production side of things: Thomas and Julian. |
| 01.6 | **ZKVM Development** A $20 million formal verification effort is being led by Alex Hicks as part of the ZKVM accelerationism initiative. The initiative aims to enhance Ethereum's security and scalability. |
| 01.7 | **Zeam Team Introduction: Client Development Team** 2025 mission includes developing a proof of concept to validate basic state transition functions. Focus on integrating with various zkVMs and ensuring seamless client POC functionality. Zeam becomes the first team to receive grant funding. Plans announced to distribute more grants throughout the year. |
| 01.8 | **Ream Labs Introduction** Formed in December 2022, ReamLabs has been developing foundational Rust code. 2025 plans focus on P2P layer development, state transition purification, and implementing post on-time signatures in Q3/Q4. |
| 01.9 | **QDRVM Introduction** QDRVM, headquartered in Kazakhstan with presence in Singapore, is working on Kagome, a C++ implementation of Polkadot-related clients. Team brings experience from Filecoin and Iroha implementations. |
| 01.10 | **Nethermind Introduction** Nethermind team is working on the beam chain project, building expertise around the consensus layer. |
| 01.11 | **Pier Two Introduction** Australian company Pier Two is developing infrastructure including Lantern for Ethereum. Current focus on building prerequisite C libraries for beam clients and developing test vectors. |
| 01.12 | **Client Development Plans** Teams discussed various programming language choices and implementation strategies. LambdaClass reported progress on their Elixir consensus client and E-Drex execution client. |
| 01.13 | **Low Resource Devices** Development efforts focus on implementing EVM and protocols for embedded devices. Teams aim to ensure functionality can be verified on lower resource devices. |
| 01.14 | **Afream Introduction** African Client Initiative new group launching to focus on ZK and Rust learning. Team has been running nodes for 4-6 months for functionality testing and developer education. |
| 01.15 | **Existing Client Team Introductions** Introductions from Prysm, Nimbus, Lodestar, Lighthouse, Teku, and Grandine |
| 01.16 | **Security Considerations** Discussion emphasized need for provable security and simplicity in Beamchain design. Teams aim to avoid historical pattern of introducing new bugs while fixing existing ones. |
| 01.17 | **Coordinator Introductions** Introductions from Ladislaus and Will |
| 01.18 | **Future Development** Plans include regular Beam calls, in-person events, and a Beam retreat later in the year. Next meeting scheduled for February 28th at 2pm UTC. |

## Action Items

1. Submit formal funding proposal to Protocol Guild DAO
2. Gather community suggestions for new project name (Lead: Ladislaus)
3. Prepare for February 28th follow-up meeting

## Next Call

Friday 2025/2/28 at 15:00 UTC
