00:13:46	Potuz:	gm
00:13:51	Justin Traglia:	Gm
00:14:22	Pooja Ranjan:	gm
00:14:50	Sam Jernigan:	gm
00:14:53	Mehdi Aouadi:	gm
00:14:54	nixo:	gm
00:14:59	Enrico Del Fante (tbenr):	gm
00:15:02	Chris Berry:	gm
00:15:16	Pooja Ranjan:	Sound is perfect, now!
00:15:52	Pooja Ranjan:	Mario is helping
00:16:19	stokes:	https://github.com/ethereum/pm/issues/1907
00:18:12	Barnabas:	is marco cutting out for anyone else?
00:18:22	Justin Traglia:	https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/pull/4558
00:18:23	Enrico Del Fante (tbenr):	Replying to "is marco cutting out..."

Here too
00:18:23	Kevaundray Wedderburn:	Replying to "is marco cutting out..."

A bit for me
00:18:30	Justin Traglia:	Reacted to "is marco cutting out..." with ğŸ‘
00:18:35	Kalo | Obol:	Replying to "is marco cutting out..."

Yap, for me as well
00:18:36	Kalo | Obol:	Reacted to "is marco cutting out..." with ğŸ‘
00:19:09	RaÃºl Kripalani:	Replying to "is marco cutting outâ€¦"
Networking team could do with a better network ğŸ˜‚
00:19:18	Justin Traglia:	Reacted to "Networking team coul..." with ğŸ˜…
00:19:20	Bharath:	Reacted to "Networking team coul..." with ğŸ˜…
00:19:26	Mehdi Aouadi:	Reacted to "Networking team coul..." with ğŸ˜…
00:19:28	Potuz:	Reacted to "Networking team coul..." with ğŸ˜…
00:19:34	Sukun Tarachandani:	Reacted to "is marco cutting outâ€¦" with ğŸ‘
00:19:37	Francesco:	Replying to "is marco cutting out..."

Putting yourselves in the userâ€™s shoes
00:19:46	stokes:	Reacted to "Networking team coul..." with ğŸ˜‚
00:19:57	Marius van der Wijden:	Whooo Lighthouse lfg
00:19:57	RaÃºl Kripalani:	Replying to "is marco cutting outâ€¦"
yep guys, this is how EIP-7870 actually feels
00:20:06	Trent:	Reacted to "Whooo Lighthouse lfg" with ğŸ”¥
00:20:18	Marius van der Wijden:	Reacted to "Whooo Lighthouse l..." with ğŸ”¥
00:20:26	RaÃºl Kripalani:	Reacted to "Whooo Lighthouse lfg" with ğŸ”¥
00:20:30	Daniel Knopik:	Reacted to "Whooo Lighthouse l..." with â¤ï¸
00:20:33	Mario Havel:	Reacted to "Whooo Lighthouse l..." with ğŸ”¥
00:20:33	Barnabas:	Reacted to "Whooo Lighthouse lfg" with ğŸ”¥
00:20:37	Justin Traglia:	Reacted to "Whooo Lighthouse lfg" with ğŸ”¥
00:21:00	Antoine James:	Reacted to "Whooo Lighthouse lfg" with ğŸ”¥
00:21:35	Matthew Keil:	@Marco Munizaga I can also give an update
00:22:37	RaÃºl Kripalani:	Reacted to "@Marco Munizaga I caâ€¦" with ğŸ”¥
00:22:38	Satyajit:	Reacted to "Networking team co..." with ğŸ˜…
00:22:45	Kalo | Obol:	Reacted to "Networking team coul..." with ğŸ˜…
00:23:03	Barnabas:	https://dora.blob-devnet-0.ethpandaops.io/blocks
00:23:17	Justin Traglia:	Reacted to "https://dora.blob-de..." with ğŸ”¥
00:23:22	RaÃºl Kripalani:	Reacted to "https://dora.blob-deâ€¦" with ğŸ”¥
00:23:47	stokes:	Reacted to "https://dora.blob-de..." with ğŸ”¥
00:24:02	Barnabas:	Replying to "https://dora.blob-de..."

We currently have ~100% mev blocks
12 private blobs / 12 public blobs (can increase further)
We have 20 clients - 10 clients support partial messages
Everyone is up to head, everyone seems to have close to every other peers - full mesh
00:24:45	Francesco:	Reacted to "https://dora.blob-de..." with ğŸ”¥
00:25:17	nflaig:	Reacted to "https://dora.blob-de..." with ğŸ”¥
00:25:50	soispoke:	Reacted to "https://dora.blob-de..." with ğŸ”¥
00:26:01	Marco Munizaga:	https://github.com/ethereum/beacon-metrics/pull/21
00:26:54	Barnabas:	Iâ€™d encourage everyone to have an opt in flag, not an opt out. And once well tested, enable it by default (cc lighthouse)
00:27:06	Daniel Knopik:	Reacted to "Iâ€™d encourage eve..." with ğŸ‘
00:27:07	Leo:	Reacted to "Iâ€™d encourage eve..." with ğŸ‘
00:27:17	RaÃºl Kripalani:	Reacted to "Iâ€™d encourage everyoâ€¦" with ğŸ‘
00:27:17	Stefan Starflinger:	Reacted to "https://dora.blob-deâ€¦" with ğŸ”¥
00:27:25	Justin Traglia:	I support doing this asap.
00:27:34	Potuz:	Reacted to "Iâ€™d encourage everyo..." with ğŸ‘
00:27:37	Phil Ngo:	Reacted to "Iâ€™d encourage everyo..." with ğŸ‘
00:27:42	Justin Traglia:	Reacted to "Iâ€™d encourage everyo..." with ğŸ‘
00:27:48	Satyajit:	Reacted to "Iâ€™d encourage eve..." with ğŸ‘
00:29:06	felipe:	Reacted to "Networking team co..." with ğŸ˜…
00:29:49	Antoine James:	Reacted to "Iâ€™d encourage everyo..." with ğŸ‘
00:30:01	Potuz:	we're targetting it
00:30:02	Justin Traglia:	We did publish a new release, with new specs for devnet-0: https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/releases/tag/v1.7.0-alpha.2
00:30:10	Antoine James:	Reacted to "We did publish a new..." with ğŸ”¥
00:30:21	Barnabas:	Reacted to "we're targetting it" with ğŸ‹ï¸
00:30:37	NC:	Lodestar is still targeting end of this month
00:31:21	Justin Traglia:	Reacted to "we're targetting it" with ğŸ‹ï¸
00:31:44	Justin Traglia:	Link to what potuz is talking about: https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/pull/4897
00:32:22	Barnabas:	Reacted to "Lodestar is still ta..." with ğŸ‹ï¸
00:32:48	Justin Traglia:	Replying to "Link to what potuz i..."

Also see: https://discord.com/channels/595666850260713488/874767108809031740/1468323583548723282
00:33:04	Justin Traglia:	Replying to "Link to what potuz i..."

I think caching deposit signature verifications is reasonable, but I could be wrong.
00:36:11	RaÃºl Kripalani:	ICYMI, we just shipped this: https://gloas.ethp2p.dev simulates the separation, and will be updated soon to add BALs, and deadline analysis based on actual network activity
00:37:56	Enrico Del Fante (tbenr):	Reacted to "ICYMI, we just shipp..." with ğŸ”¥
00:38:10	Justin Traglia:	Replying to "ICYMI, we just shipp..."

This is super cool ğŸ”¥ one quick question, why are the raw/wire sizes different between fulu and gloas?
[Full message cannot be displayed on this version]
00:38:31	Yann Vonlanthen:	Reacted to "ICYMI, we just shipp..." with ğŸ”¥
00:38:52	Satyajit:	Reacted to "ICYMI, we just shi..." with ğŸ”¥
00:39:01	Justin Traglia:	Replying to "ICYMI, we just shipp..."

For example, 240/238 for fulu and 240/235 for gloas.
00:39:34	Leo:	It would be better to not normalize the bars, so that we can easily see the differences between slots
00:39:59	Satyajit:	Replying to "ICYMI, we just shi..."

Looks great! An arrow to move forward/backward among slots easily would be great.
00:40:01	Potuz:	@FrancescoÂ I want to merge this https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/pull/4884  :)
00:40:12	Justin Traglia:	Reacted to "ICYMI, we just shipp..." with ğŸ”¥
00:40:33	hangleang:	Reacted to "ICYMI, we just shi..." with ğŸ”¥
00:40:46	stokes:	https://ethereum-magicians.org/tag/hegota
00:40:57	RaÃºl Kripalani:	Replying to "It would be better tâ€¦"
AFAIK the max bar width is the max of whatâ€™s displayed in the view (so itâ€™s already relative). Are you seeing something different?
00:42:09	Enrico Del Fante (tbenr):	Replying to "ICYMI, we just shipp..."

is ratio sign hardcoded to be - ?
[Full message cannot be displayed on this version]
00:42:46	donnoh | L2BEAT:	Reacted to "ICYMI, we just shippâ€¦" with ğŸ”¥
00:43:16	Enrico Del Fante (tbenr):	Replying to "ICYMI, we just shipp..."

Seems the first two should be positive, not negative
00:43:54	Ansgar Dietrichs:	I think we have broad consensus on prioritizing CR in H*.

I am not super deep in the weeds on the specifics of the FOCIL mechanism - how much consensus is there around this specifically being the right approach? Is this something that needs more discussion? If so, would we do that before or after selecting it as headliner?
00:44:21	Ansgar Dietrichs:	Replying to "I think we have broa..."

I think I remember some skepticism by @Toni WahrstÃ¤tter for example?
00:44:33	Potuz:	Replying to "I think we have broa..."

I do not think there is any alternative mechanism proposed
00:44:39	soispoke:	Reacted to "I do not think there..." with ğŸ‘
00:44:49	RaÃºl Kripalani:	Replying to "ICYMI, we just shippâ€¦"
Hmm good find, this looks like a bug.
00:44:58	RaÃºl Kripalani:	Reacted to "Seems the first two â€¦" with ğŸ‘
00:45:19	Enrico Del Fante (tbenr):	Reacted to "Hmm good find, this ..." with ğŸ‘
00:45:23	RaÃºl Kripalani:	Replying to "ICYMI, we just shippâ€¦"
Should be fixed shortly!
00:45:29	Enrico Del Fante (tbenr):	Reacted to "Should be fixed shor..." with ğŸ”¥
00:45:51	Ansgar Dietrichs:	Replying to "I think we have broa..."

yes I just want to confirm we actually think itâ€™s the right thing to do. My assumption is that the answer is yes, but important to be certain about this.
00:45:52	Julian Ma:	Replying to "I think we have broa..."

Do you mean whether FOCIL as a whole is the right specific approach or whether some of the specifics of FOCIL should be changed like exact enforcement rules of the IL and size etc
00:46:14	Ansgar Dietrichs:	Replying to "I think we have broa..."

@Julian Ma FOCIL as a whole - adjustments can always be made post headliner selection
00:46:19	Julian Ma:	Reacted to "@Julian Ma FOCIL as ..." with ğŸ‘
00:46:21	soispoke:	@Ansgar Dietrichs I donâ€™t want to speak for Toni but Iâ€™d say some critics were mostly around prioritizing CR/FOCIL for H* 

And maybe the conditional/unconditional property (but itâ€™s more of a FOCIL parameter)
00:46:34	Stefan Starflinger:	Reacted to "ICYMI, we just shippâ€¦" with ğŸ”¥
00:46:54	Justin Traglia:	Reacted to "Should be fixed shor..." with ğŸ”¥
00:47:23	Toni WahrstÃ¤tter:	Replying to "[Full message cannot be displayed on this version]" 

 Yeah agree, it feels like the majority is for focil and this is what we should then go for as a headliner ğŸ‘ğŸ¼
00:47:24	donnoh | L2BEAT:	Replying to "I think we have broaâ€¦"
from my convos with optimistic rollups in the context of reducing the challenge period, focil is not seen as a blocker but rather other things mainly related to networking or unknown bugs (concerns mainly coming from offchain labs). iâ€™d love to have a better economic model to understand benefits in terms of economic advantage, mainly in terms of additional cost to attacker to bribe to miss slots (or the IL committee). as a comparison, 6s slots increase the attacker cost by 2x, not sure if FOCIL is more or less
00:48:12	Toni WahrstÃ¤tter:	Replying to "[Full message cannot be displayed on this version]" 

 Agree with ansgar here though
00:48:36	Julian Ma:	Replying to "I think we have broa..."

Iâ€™m not aware of any other mechanism. The big property FOCIL does not give is CR for MEV txs.

The proposed mechanisms for that - multiple concurrent proposers, explored mostly for e.g. Solana - seem to be converging on being very very similar to the FOCIL architecture
00:48:37	soispoke:	https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/hegota-headliner-proposal-focil-eip-7805/27604

In the proposal btw we mentioned the tradeoffs (and the critics) explicitly
00:48:39	DA | Flashbots:	Replying to "I think we have broa..."

Thereâ€™s quite of bit of consensus in MEV research that FOCIL is a pretty weak design. Worse than unconditional ILs and much worse than some other less fleshed out designs. 

But the impact on builders is very little. So weâ€™re not blocking.
00:48:40	Toni WahrstÃ¤tter:	Replying to "[Full message cannot be displayed on this version]" 

 Should now also be considered in light of AA or encrypted mempools as potential EL headliners
00:49:03	Julian Ma:	Replying to "I think we have broa..."

@DA | Flashbots which other less fleshed out designs do you refer to?
00:49:09	Enrico Del Fante (tbenr):	FOCIL!
00:49:12	Justin Traglia:	Reacted to "FOCIL!" with â¤ï¸
00:49:16	soispoke:	Reacted to "FOCIL!" with â¤ï¸
00:49:17	Marc:	Reacted to "FOCIL!" with â¤ï¸
00:49:20	Ansgar Dietrichs:	yes sounds like in the comments as well that people have high confidence in FOCIL the specific mechanism already
00:49:23	Mehdi Aouadi:	Reacted to "FOCIL!" with â¤ï¸
00:49:24	IvÃ¡n | Lambda:	Reacted to "FOCIL!" with â¤ï¸
00:49:41	DA | Flashbots:	Replying to "I think we have broa..."

@Julian Ma some form of splitting auctions into many auctions to have multiple builders construct single blocks.
00:49:42	nflaig:	Reacted to "FOCIL!" with â¤ï¸
00:49:48	Justin Traglia:	Reacted to "yes sounds like in t..." with ğŸ‘
00:50:04	Mehdi Aouadi:	Reacted to "yes sounds like in t..." with ğŸ‘
00:50:23	Matthew Keil:	Reacted to "FOCIL!" with â¤ï¸
00:50:32	Francesco:	Replying to "I think we have broa..."

Thereâ€™s less fleshed out and thereâ€™s â€œpeople have been talking about this stuff for years without anything implementable coming out of itâ€
00:50:50	Ansgar Dietrichs:	I personally think weâ€™d pretty clearly be in a place to make a decision today already, but also fine to wait 2 weeks
00:51:07	soispoke:	Reacted to "Thereâ€™s less fleshed..." with ğŸ‘
00:51:10	Julian Ma:	Reacted to "@Julian Ma some form..." with ğŸ‘
00:51:20	Leo:	Replying to "It would be better..."

I meant the main bar, the ones below are not normalized, so they are good. But every time the main bar is refreshed  we need to look at the number to understand. Is a detail, but I thought it could help.
00:51:30	Francesco:	Replying to "I think we have broa..."

Imho we should very much consider having the design be unconditional for now, everything else can hopefully be built in the future from the foundation of multiple contributions to the building process
00:51:42	felix (eest):	Reacted to "FOCIL!" with â¤ï¸
00:52:13	Julian Ma:	Replying to "I think we have broa..."

From what I understand to be the current main proposal, itâ€™s based on this minus the erasure coding part https://eprint.iacr.org/2025/1772 

Itâ€™s basically FOCIL infra + some small rule changes + potentially encryption

That is to say, if we do FOCIL, we could extend it into MCP. FOCIL is a necessary step for it
00:52:15	nixo:	bye!
00:52:16	donnoh | L2BEAT:	Reacted to "yes sounds like in tâ€¦" with ğŸ‘
00:52:17	donnoh | L2BEAT:	Reacted to "FOCIL!" with â¤ï¸
00:52:35	DA | Flashbots:	Replying to "I think we have broa..."

@Julian Ma  letâ€™s jam in our call next week
00:52:39	Julian Ma:	Reacted to "@Julian Ma  letâ€™s ja..." with ğŸ‘
